MEDITATION ACCORDING TO YOGA
WHAT IS MEDITATION?
What is meditation? Meditation is the power which enables us to resist
all this. Nature may call us, "Look, there is a beautiful thing!" I do not look.
Now she says, "There is a beautiful smell; smell it!" I say to my nose, "Do not
smell it", and the nose doesn't. "Eyes, do not see!" Nature does such an awful
thing - kills one of my children, and says, "Now, rascal, sit down and weep! Go
to the depths!" I say, "I don't have to." I jump up. I must be free. Try it
sometimes... [In meditation], for a moment, you can change this nature. Now,
if you had that power in yourself, would not that be heaven, freedom? That is
the power of meditation.
How is it to be attained? In a dozen different ways. Each temperament
has its own way. But this is the general principle: get hold of the mind. The
mind is like a lake, and every stone that drops into it raises waves. These waves
do not let us see what we are. The full moon is reflected in the water of the
lake, but the surface is so disturbed that we do not see the reflection clearly.
Let it be calm. Do not let nature raise the wave. Keep quiet, and then after a
little while she will give you up. Then we know what we are. God is there
already, but the mind is so agitated, always running after the senses. You close
the senses and [yet] you whirl and whirl about. Just this moment I think I am
all right and I will meditate upon God, and then my mind goes to London in
one minute. And if I pull it away from there, it goes to New York to think about
the things I have done there in the past. These [waves] are to be stopped by
the power of meditation. (CW4.248)
THE GATE TO BLISS
Meditation is the gate that opens that to us. Prayers, ceremonials, and all
the other forms of worship are simply kindergartens of meditation. You pray, you
offer something. A certain theory existed that everything raised one's spiritual
power. The use of certain words, flowers, images, temples, ceremonials like the
waving of lights brings the mind to that attitude, but that attitude is always in the
human soul, nowhere else. [People] are all doing it; but what they do without
knowing it, do knowingly. That is the power of meditation.
Slowly and gradually we are to train ourselves. It is no joke - not a
question of a day, or years, or maybe of births. Never mind! The pull must go on.
Knowingly, voluntarily, the pull must go on. Inch by inch we will gain ground.
We will begin to feel and get real possessions, which no one can take away from
us - the wealth that no man can take, the wealth that nobody can destroy, the joy
that no misery can hurt any more. (CW 4.248-249)
IN SEARCH OF TRUTH
Yoga is the science which teaches us how to get these perceptions. It is
not much use to talk about religion until one has felt it. Why is there so much
disturbance, so much fighting and quarrelling in the name of God? There has
been more bloodshed in the name of God than for any other cause, because
people never went to the fountain-head; they were content only to give a mental
assent to the customs of their forefathers, and wanted others to do the same.
What right has a man to say he has a soul if he does not feel it, or that there is a
God if he does not see Him? If there is a God we must see Him, if there is a soul
we must perceive it; otherwise it is better not to believe. It is better to be an
outspoken atheist than a hypocrite.
Man wants truth, wants to experience truth for himself; when he has
grasped it, realised it, felt it within his heart of hearts, then alone, declare the
Vedas, would all doubts vanish, all darkness be scattered, and all crookedness be
made straight. (CW 1.127-28)
HOW RESTLESS IS THE MIND!
How hard it is to control the mind! Well has it been compared to the
maddened monkey. There was a monkey, restless by his own nature, as all
monkeys are. As if that were not enough someone made him drink freely of wine,
so that he became still more restless. Then a scorpion stung him. When a man is
stung by a scorpion, he jumps about for a whole day; so the poor monkey found
his condition worse than ever. To complete his misery a demon entered into him.
What language can describe the uncontrollable restlessness of that monkey? The
human mind is like that monkey, incessantly active by its own nature; then it
becomes drunk with the wine of desire, thus increasing its turbulence. After
desire takes possession comes the sting of the scorpion of jealousy at the success
of others, and last of all the demon of pride enters the mind, making it think itself
of all importance. How hard to control such a mind! (CW 1.174)
A TREMONDOUS TASK
According to the Yogis, there are three principal nerve currents; one they
call the Idâ, the other the Pingalâ, and the middle one the Sushumnâ, and all
these are inside the spinal column. The Ida and the Pingala, the left and the right,
are clusters of nerves, while the middle one, the Sushumna, is hollow and is not
a cluster of nerves. This Sushumna is closed, and for the ordinary man is of no
use, for he works through the Ida and the Pingala only. Currents are continually 

going down and coming up through these nerves, carrying orders all over the
body through other nerves running to the different organs of the body.
The task before us is vast; and first and foremost, we must seek to control
the vast mass of sunken thoughts which have become automatic with us. The
evil deed is, no doubt, on the conscious plane; but the cause which produced the
evil deed was far beyond in the realms of the unconscious, unseen, and therefore
more potent.
This is the first part of the study, the control of the unconscious. The next
is to go beyond the conscious. So, therefore, we see now that there must be a
twofold work. First, by the proper working of the Ida and the Pingala, which are
the two existing ordinary currents, to control the subconscious action; and
secondly, to go beyond even consciousness.
He alone is the Yogi who, after long practice in self-concentration, has
attained to this truth. The Sushumna now opens and a current which never
before entered into this new passage will find its way into it, and gradually ascend
to (what we call in figurative language) the different lotus centres, till at last it
reaches the brain. Then the Yogi becomes conscious of what he really is, God
Himself. (CW 2. 30, 34, 36)
ENVIRONMENT FOR MEDITATION
Those of you who can afford it will do better to have a room for this
practice alone. Do not sleep in that room, it must be kept holy. You must not
enter the room until you have bathed, and are perfectly clean in body and mind.
Place flowers in that room always; they are the best surroundings for a Yogi; also
pictures that are pleasing. Burn incense morning and evening. Have no
quarrelling, nor anger, nor unholy thought in that room. Only allow those
persons to enter it who are of the same thought as you. Then gradually there will
be an atmosphere of holiness in the room, so that when you are miserable,
sorrowful, doubtful, or your mind is disturbed, the very fact of entering that
room will make you calm. This was the idea of the temple and the church, and in
some temples and churches you will find it even now, but in the majority of them
the very idea has been lost. The idea is that by keeping holy vibrations there the
place becomes and remains illumined. Those who cannot afford to have a room
set apart can practise anywhere they like. (CW 1. 145)
REQUISITES FOR MEDITATION
Where there is fire, or in water or on ground which is strewn with dry
leaves, where there are many ant-hills, where there are wild animals, or danger,
where four streets meet, where there is too much noise, where there are many
wicked persons, Yoga must not be practised. This applies more particularly to
India. Do not practise when the body feels very lazy or ill, or when the mind is
very miserable and sorrowful. Go to a place which is well hidden, and where
people do not come to disturb you. Do not choose dirty places. Rather choose
beautiful scenery, or a room in your own house which is beautiful. When you
practise, first salute all the ancient Yogis, and your own Guru, and God, and then
begin. (CW 1. 192)
TIME FOR MEDITATION
You must practise at least twice every day, and the best times are towards
the morning and the evening. When night passes into day, and day into night, a
state of relative calmness ensues. The early morning and the early evening are
the two periods of calmness. Your body will have a like tendency to become calm
at those times. We should take advantage of that natural condition and begin
then to practise. Make it a rule not to eat until you have practised; if you do this,
the sheer force of hunger will break your laziness. In India they teach children
never to eat until they have practised or worshipped, and it becomes natural to
them after a time; a boy will not feel hungry until he has bathed and practised.
(CW 1. 144-45)
NOW PRAY!
Mentally repeat:
Let all beings be happy;
let all beings be peaceful;
let all beings be blissful.
So do to the east, south, north and west. The more you do that the better
you will feel yourself. You will find at last that the easiest way to make ourselves
healthy is to see that others are healthy, and the easiest way to make ourselves
happy is to see that others are happy. After doing that, those who believe in God
should pray--not for money, not for health, nor for heaven; pray for knowledge
and light; every other prayer is selfish. (CW 1. 145-46)
THE FIRST LESSON
Sit for some time and let the mind run on. The mind is bubbling up all the
time. It is like that monkey jumping about. Let the monkey jump as much as he
can; you simply wait and watch. Knowledge is power, says the proverb, and that
is true. Until you know what the mind is doing you cannot control it. Give it the 
rein; many hideous thoughts may come into it; you will be astonished that it was
possible for you to think such thoughts. But you will find that each day the mind's
vagaries are becoming less and less violent, that each day it is becoming calmer.
Give up all argumentation and other distractions. Is there anything in dry
intellectual jargon? It only throws the mind off its balance and disturbs it. Things
of subtler planes have to be realised. Will talking do that? So give up all vain talk.
Read only those books which have been written by persons who have had
realisation. (CW 1. 174, 176-77)
NOW THINK!
Think of your own body, and see that it is strong and healthy; it is the best
instrument you have. Think of it as being as strong as adamant, and that with the
help of this body you will cross the ocean of life. Freedom is never to be reached
by the weak. Throw away all weakness. Tell your body that it is strong, tell your
mind that it is strong, and have unbounded faith and hope in yourself. (CW 1.
146)
A FEW EXAMPLES OF MEDITATION
Imagine a lotus upon the top of the head, several inches up, with virtue
as its centre, and knowledge as its stalk. The eight petals of the lotus are the eight
powers of the Yogi. Inside, the stamens and pistils are renunciation. If the Yogi
refuses the external powers he will come to salvation. So the eight petals of the
lotus are the eight powers, but the internal stamens and pistils are extreme
renunciation, the renunciation of all these powers. Inside of that lotus think of
the Golden One, the Almighty, the Intangible, He whose name is Om, the
Inexpressible, surrounded with effulgent light. Meditate on that.
Another meditation is given. Think of a space in your heart, and in the
midst of that space think that a flame is burning. Think of that flame as your own
soul and inside the flame is another effulgent light, and that is the Soul of your
soul, God. Meditate upon that in the heart. (CW 1. 192-93)
HOW TO REACH THE GOAL
Whether you live or die does not matter. You have to plunge in and work,
without thinking of the result. If you are brave enough, in six months you will be
a perfect Yogi. But those who take up just a bit of it and a little of everything else
make no progress. It is of no use simply to take a course of lessons.
To succeed, you must have tremendous perseverance, tremendous will.
"I will drink the ocean," says the persevering soul, "at my will mountains will
crumble up." Have that sort of energy, that sort of will, work hard, and you will
reach the goal. (CW 1. 178)
BE CAREFUL!
Every motion is in a circle. If you can take up a stone, and project it into
space, and then live long enough, that stone, if it meets with no obstruction, will
come back exactly to your hand. A straight line, infinitely projected, must end in
a circle. Therefore, this idea that the destiny of man is progressing ever forward
and forward, and never stopping, is absurd. Although extraneous to the subject,
I may remark that this idea explains the ethical theory that you must not hate,
and must love. Because, just as in the case of electricity the modern theory is
that the power leaves the dynamo and completes the circle back to the dynamo,
so with hate and love; they must come back to the source. Therefore do not hate
anybody, because that hatred which comes out from you, must, in the long run,
come back to you. If you love, that love will come back to you, completing the
circle. (CW 1. 196)
THE MIND-LAKE
The bottom of a lake we cannot see, because its surface is covered with
ripples. It is only possible for us to catch a glimpse of the bottom, when the
ripples have subsided, and the water is calm. If the water is muddy or is agitated
all the time, the bottom will not be seen. If it is clear, and there are no waves, we
shall see the bottom. The bottom of the lake is our own true Self; the lake is the
Chitta and the waves the Vrittis.
Again, the mind is in three states, one of which is darkness, called Tamas,
found in brutes and idiots; it only acts to injure. No other idea comes into that
state of mind. Then there is the active state of mind, Rajas, whose chief motives
are power and enjoyment. "I will be powerful and rule others." Then there is the
state called Sattva, serenity, calmness, in which the waves cease, and the water
of the mind-lake becomes clear. (CW 2. 202)
MIND AND ITS CONTROL
Meditation is one of the great means of controlling the rising of these
waves. By meditation you can make the mind subdue these waves, and if you go
on practising meditation for days, and months, and years, until it has become a
habit, until it will come in spite of yourself, anger and hatred will be controlled
and checked. (CW 1. 242-43)
BE CHEERFUL!
The first sign that you are becoming religious is that you are becoming
cheerful. When a man is gloomy, that may be dyspepsia, but it is not religion.To the Yogi everything is bliss, every human face that he sees brings
cheerfulness to him. That is the sign of a virtuous man. Misery is caused by sin,
and by no other cause. What business have you with clouded faces? It is terrible.
If you have a clouded face, do not go out that day, shut yourself up in your room.
What right have you to carry this disease out into the world? (CW 1. 264-65)
THE SIGNS OF A YOGI
"He who hates none, who is the friend of all, who is merciful to all, who
has nothing of his own, who is free from egoism, who is even-minded in pain and
pleasure, who is forbearing, who is always satisfied, who works always in Yoga,
whose self has become controlled, whose will is firm, whose mind and intellect
are given up unto Me, such a one is My beloved Bhakta. From whom comes no
disturbance, who cannot be disturbed by others, who is free from joy, anger, fear,
and anxiety, such a one is My beloved. He who does not depend on anything,
who is pure and active, who does not care whether good comes or evil, and never
becomes miserable, who has given up all efforts for himself; who is the same in
praise or in blame, with a silent, thoughtful mind, blessed with what little comes
in his way, homeless, for the whole world is his home, and who is steady in his
ideas, such a one is My beloved Bhakta." Such alone become Yogis. (CW 1. 193)
BE LIKE A PEARL OYSTER
There is a pretty Indian fable to the effect that if it rains when the star
Svati is in the ascendant, and a drop of rain falls into an oyster, that drop becomes
a pearl. The oysters know this, so they come to the surface when that star shines,
and wait to catch the precious raindrop. When a drop falls into them, quickly the
oysters close their shells and dive down to the bottom of the sea, there to
patiently develop the drop into the pearl. We should be like that. First hear, then
understand, and then, leaving all distractions, shut your minds to outside
influences, and devote yourselves to developing the truth within you. (CW 1.
177)
PATIENCE
There was a great god-sage called Narada. Just as there are sages among
mankind, great Yogis, so there are great Yogis among the gods. Narada was a
good Yogi, and very great. He travelled everywhere. One day he was passing
through a forest, and saw a man who had been meditating until the white ants
had built a huge mound round his body--so long had he been sitting in that
position. He said to Narada, "Where are you going?" Narada replied, "I am going
to heaven." "Then ask God when He will be merciful to me; when I shall attain
freedom." Further on Narada saw another man. He was jumping about, singing,
dancing, and said, "Oh, Narada, where are you going?" His voice and his gestures
were wild. Narada said, "I am going to heaven." "Then, ask when I shall be free."
Narada went on. In the course of time he came again by the same road, and there
was the man who had been meditating with the ant-hill round him. He said, "Oh,
Narada, did you ask the Lord about me?" "Oh, yes." "What did He say?" "The
Lord told me that you would attain freedom in four more births." Then the man
began to weep and wail, and said, "I have meditated until an ant-hill has grown
around me, and I have four more births yet!" Narada went to the other man. "Did
you ask my question?" "Oh, yes. Do you see this tamarind tree? I have to tell you
that as many leaves as there are on that tree, so many times, you shall be born,
and then you shall attain freedom." The man began to dance for joy, and said, "I
shall have freedom after such a short time!" A voice came, "My child, you will
have freedom this minute." That was the reward for his perseverance. He was
ready to work through all those births, nothing discouraged him. (CW 1. 193-94)
IN THE REALM OF TRANQUILITY
The greatest help to spiritual life is meditation (Dhyana). In meditation
we divest ourselves of all material conditions and feel our divine nature. We do
not depend upon any external help in meditation. The touch of the soul can paint
the brightest colour even in the dingiest places; it can cast a fragrance over the
vilest thing; it can make the wicked divine--and all enmity, all selfishness is
effaced. The less the thought of the body, the better. For it is the body that drags
us down. It is attachment, identification, which makes us miserable. That is the
secret: To think that I am the spirit and not the body, and that the whole of this
universe with all its relations, with all its good and all its evil, is but as a series of
paintings--scenes on a canvas--of which I am the witness. (CW 2. 37)
TRANSFORMATION THROUGH MEDITATION
There was a young man that could not in any way support his family. He
was strong and vigorous and, finally, became a highway robber; he attacked
persons in the street and robbed them, and with that money he supported his
father, mother, wife, and children. This went on continually, until one day a great
saint called Narada was passing by, and the robber attacked him.
The sage asked the robber, "Why are you going to rob me? It is a great
sin to rob human beings and kill them. What do you incur all this sin for?" The
robber said, "Why, I want to support my family with this money." "Now", said the
sage, "do you think that they take a share of your sin also?" "Certainly they do,"
replied the robber. "Very good," said the sage, "make me safe by tying me up 
here, while you go home and ask your people whether they will share your sin in
the same way as they share the money you make." The man accordingly went to
his father, and asked, "Father, do you know how I support you?" He answered,
"No, I do not." "I am a robber, and I kill persons and rob them." "What! you do
that, my son? Get away! You outcast!" He then went to his mother and asked
her, "Mother, do you know how I support you?" "No," she replied. "Through
robbery and murder." "How horrible it is!" cried the mother. "But, do you partake
in my sin?" said the son. "Why should I? I never committed a robbery," answered
the mother. Then, he went to his wife and questioned her, "Do you know how I
maintain you all?" "No," she responded. "Why, I am a highwayman," he rejoined,
"and for years have been robbing people; that is how I support and maintain you
all. And what I now want to know is, whether you are ready to share in my sin."
"By no means. You are my husband, and it is your duty to support me."
The eyes of the robber were opened. "That is the way of the world--
even my nearest relatives, for whom I have been robbing, will not share in my
destiny." He came back to the place where he had bound the sage, unfastened
his bonds, fell at his feet, recounted everything and said, "Save me! What can I
do?" The sage said, "Give up your present course of life. You see that none of
your family really loves you, so give up all these delusions. They will share your
prosperity; but the moment you have nothing, they will desert you. There is none
who will share in your evil, but they will all share in your good. Therefore worship
Him who alone stands by us whether we are doing good or evil. He never leaves
us, for love never drags down, knows no barter, no selfishness."
Then the sage taught him how to worship. And this man left everything
and went into a forest. There he went on praying and meditating until he forgot
himself so entirely that the ants came and built ant-hills around him, and he was
quite unconscious of it. After many years had passed, a voice came saying, "Arise,
O sage!" Thus aroused he exclaimed, "Sage? I am a robber!" "No more 'robber',"
answered the voice, "a purified sage art thou. Thine old name is gone. But now,
since thy meditation was so deep and great that thou didst not remark even the
ant-hills which surrounded thee, henceforth, thy name shall be Valmiki--'he that
was born in the ant-hill'." So, he became a sage. (CW 4. 63-65)